[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Thinking Allowed,
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today, we are going to explore
the cultural creatives,
a fascinating new
demographic category.
And I'm pleased to have with
me sociologist Paul Ray,
the discoverer of the cultural
creatives category, if you
will, and author with his
wife, Sherry Ruth Anderson,
of the book "The
Cultural Creatives."
Welcome, Paul.
>> Thanks for
having me, Jeffrey.
>> You know, I was searching
for a word there a moment ago.
>> Subculture.
>> Subculture, there we go.
>> A part of American culture,
a different way of life,
different set of beliefs,
especially a different set
of values--
what's most important
in people's lives--
and different lifestyles too.
>> And they comprise?
>> 50 million Americans,
26% of the adults in the US.
>> Well, that's a
significant subculture.
>> Yeah, it's big.
It's really big.
And that means it's
really mainstream.
We're not talking about
California or new age
or anything obscure like that.
We're talking about a major
shift in what people believe,
what they think is
real, and so on.
So these are the people
who really take environment
and ecology seriously, and
personal growth and development
and relationships--
and, and, and, and, and--
it's a long, long list.
But the main things are that
it's a shift in a whole belief
system.
It's not just about who's
enlightened and who's not.
It's not just about baby boomers
or bobos or anything like that.
It's a major shift that's
been going on for 40 years,
and it's significant
because it really
tells us about how American
culture is changing
in a very dramatic way.
>> And many people are paying
attention to this research.
You've pioneered the research.
I believe you coined the term--
>> Yeah, I had to make it up.
>> --the cultural creatives.
And so how does one distinguish,
in the field of demographics
and sociology, from discovering
a subculture as opposed to,
I don't know, defining it
or creating it by fiat?
>> Well, the first thing is
values and lifestyles are what
I've been studying.
And demographics of age
income, occupation, education,
things like that, turn
out to be much less
important than what people
believe is real and significant
in their lives.
And so what I did was come up
with the best way of predicting
what people are actually going
to do when they give money
to good causes, when they buy a
car, a house, go on vacation--
what they want in life, what
they want the country to be.
And so it turns
out that when you
look at values and lifestyles
in the United States,
there are three
competing subcultures.
One everybody knows about,
the moderns, the world
according to "Time" magazine.
And another everybody also
knows about, the world
according to Jerry Falwell.
And that's the people who think
of themselves as traditionals.
The traditionals are
about 24% of the country,
just under a quarter.
They used to be about half 50
years ago, around World War II,
and they've slowly
shrunk over time.
They're getting old,
and they're dying off,
and their children aren't
becoming traditionals.
They're becoming moderns.
Moderns-- the world,
according to "Time" magazine,
is really a world of
getting and spending,
a world of materialism.
Your body's like a machine.
Your organization's
like a machine.
Time is money, that
kind of concern.
And so those two concerns we
know of as the culture wars.
But what's happened
is a third population
has emerged really
since the '60s.
And the cultural creatives
then were too few to measure.
If we had done surveys, we'd
have found them at less than 3%
or 4% of the population.
And now, they're up to
more than a quarter.
They've grown slowly, about half
a percent a year for 40 years.
>> Well, you know, I've had a
discussion not long ago with
the philosopher Huston Smith,
who talks about the distinction
between traditional
values, modern values,
and then he calls them
postmodern values.
But I gather that you don't
equate the cultural creatives
with being postmodern?
>> Well, some of them are.
[CHUCKLES] Actually, I
use a different term.
I want to talk about
transmodern, something
that cuts across, making
their own synthesis
of the traditional and the
moderns, finding the best stuff
and trying to create
a new kind of culture.
I call them cultural creatives
because they're literally
trying to make a new way
of life, a new culture,
and they're often
succeeding at it.
So that's a crucial piece.
What Huston is talking
about, of course,
looks postmodern from
a philosophical sense.
But we don't want to
talk about postmodern
like literary criticism
or art criticism
because that really
wouldn't be it.
That's confined to a
teeny-weeny, little slice
of intellectuals
that really, I think,
are off course, kind
of a hypermodernism,
tearing down the last
vestiges of modernism.
These are folks of all social
classes, all different races,
ethnic groups, heavily
women, however--
that's one thing in
which they're different
demographically--
and what they want is really
a new way of life, a New Deal.
And they want a world that's
ecologically sustainable,
and they're very concerned
about the whole planet, not just
a nationalistic perspective,
but a large planetary view,
but also an inner development,
a set of concerns.
What's subjectively
true, what's true for me,
has to really work.
And it also has to
work in the big picture
of the whole planet.
>> And as I understand
this grouping,
the cultural
creative subculture,
44 million people or so--
>> 50.
>> --50, a huge group, but
the people involved don't know
that.
>> Yeah, now, that's
the interesting part.
Each person got there
all by his or herself.
The cultural
creatives, as they say,
didn't get there with their
whole high school graduating
class.
[CHUCKLES] They had to
become very individualistic
and drop out of either modern
or traditional cultures' way
of understanding the world.
And what we found,
incidentally, in the 60 depth
interviews we did on top of
all the surveys I've done--
>> I might add, you've
surveyed how many people?
>> Oh, between 100,000 and
150,000 people over 14 years
and 500 focus groups.
So we did 60 depth interviews,
and, overwhelmingly,
every person we talked to took
anywhere from 5 to 15 years,
about 10 years on average,
to change their life,
to change over their
lifestyle, where
they lived, who they
were married to,
all the whole pattern of their
life to fit their beliefs.
And their beliefs kept
slowly changing as the people
they associated with changed.
And so that's how you know
it's a real cultural shift.
Who people associated
with changed.
What was in their
houses changed.
And, most of all, what they
thought was real changed.
They didn't want to accept the
idea that the world is just
that hard stuff you
can bump your shins on,
a physical reality only.
It was more than that.
And the more than, rather
than just saying, well,
modernism doesn't
work, that's how
it's different than, say,
being just postmodern.
>> But there is this sense, as
they went through the change
and left behind so many old
friends and acquaintances,
obviously they didn't
come across a new--
any organization that
could speak for them,
like the National Association
of Cultural Creatives,
or the political parties.
There must be this sense
of being out on a limb.
>> Yeah, that's exactly right.
Over and over again,
when we've given talks--
my wife did the book
with me, Sherry Anderson,
a psychologist--
when we've given talks, people
have said over and over again,
oh my god, now I know
who my people are.
You've given me a reason to
be hopeful about the world.
That sense of not knowing
who your people are
is very important because it
really reflects the media.
The national media
don't acknowledge
that the cultural
creatives are there.
They're acting like gatekeepers
of the official culture
of the American life, just as
government and big business do.
And to them, those people
shouldn't be there.
It's stronger than
just saying they don't
want to acknowledge something.
It's that it shouldn't be there.
And so you get nasty
side sidelong references
that anybody who's different is,
by definition, kooky or flaky
or something like that.
But in fact, these are very
solid, well-grounded people.
I remember when we were
interviewed recently
by a woman who was
doing an article--
what was it?-- straw bale
houses for the "New York Times."
And she said, you know,
I've been trying to find out
who these people are.
I thought they'd all
be kind of crazy who
were doing straw bale houses.
But she said, you know, they're
practical, grounded people.
And she finally saw an
article that I had written,
and she said, oh, that's
who these folks are.
Now I understand it.
It's what they
believe is different.
You see, we have a tendency
in the United States
to attribute things to
psychology of the individual,
to say that's because
of your personality
or how developed you are.
But in fact, there are
smart ones and dumb ones.
There are neurotic ones
and enlightened ones.
There are rich and poor.
That's a whole variety of
differences that have come up,
that create a new
way of life because
of different experiences.
>> Well, I would tend, if I
had to use one word to describe
the cultural creatives, I
would use the word future.
They're future oriented, where
the traditionalists strike me
as past oriented,
and the modernists
strike me as present oriented.
>> Well, there's
certainly some of that.
There's simultaneously a
kind of reaching back as far
as you can go into
the deep past to see
if you can find symbols and
legitimations that go way back.
But yes, there is a concern
for the future of the planet,
for example.
And the cultural
creatives are really
leading that American
tendency to say
I'm worried about
what kind of world
my children are going to
inherit, or my grandchildren,
30 years from now.
In focus groups we did for
the EPA, the Environmental
Protection Agency, in
the beginning of '99,
most people said,
nine out of 10,
I'm really terribly
worried about the kind
of world my children
are going to inherit.
And so then I did a
survey shortly afterwards,
and then put that question
in, 80% of Americans
are terribly worried
about what kind of world
their children will inherit,
and the leadership of that
turned out to be the
cultural creatives.
In fact, the leadership on
ecological sustainability
turned out to be the
cultural creatives.
The leadership on
social justice issues
turned out to be
culture creatives
and the personal growth
and development stuff.
What we're finding is these
are people who have really
become opinion leaders
around many new developments
in American life.
>> Paul, we're going
to take a short break.
We'll be back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're back.
I'm talking with
sociologist Paul Ray
about a unique
subculture identified
as the cultural creatives.
And before our break, Paul, you
said that these are the opinion
leaders--
>> Mm-hmm, for new changes.
>> --for new changes.
That's different than, I
think, what the traditionalists
rail against when they talk
about the cultural elite.
>> That's right.
Cultural creatives are all
different social classes.
They're definitely not the top
most affluent opinion leaders
in Washington or New York.
>> They don't control the
newspapers and the film
industry.
>> Quite the contrary.
They never see their
face shown in the media.
And they're folks who are
pretty ordinary in lots of ways,
but they have one
thing in common.
Those concerns for environment,
for women's issues,
for relationships,
for social justice,
for alternative health care--
all those, all grow
out of the '60s, '70s,
'80s, '90s social
movements-- a whole set
of changes in consciousness
that we could call consciousness
movements, if you
like, big trends,
and actual social movements
with people demonstrating
on the barricades.
But all the cultural creatives
are the supporters of those.
They don't have to
be the people who
are the most active activists.
They are the folks who read
everything and gave money
and really paid attention
and, most of all, applied it.
And what we found that
was really stunning
about cultural creatives was
that each of the movements
had done something
that was crucial to how
the cultural
creatives came to be.
They all engaged in
what's called reframing.
So you had cases like
Martin Luther King.
In the days of the
mid to late '50s,
King was considered
a real troublemaker
by the other Black leadership
because he didn't play
the game of ethnic politics.
Rather, he said this condition
of the Blacks in the South
is a violation of freedom,
justice, the Constitution,
basic human dignity, and
it violates the promises we
made to ourselves as Americans.
>> He appealed to our ideals.
>> He appealed to our ideals
and articulated a philosophy
of non-violence to go with it.
That was crucial.
He didn't say it's
time the Blacks got
theirs 'cause we
delivered the vote,
like the Irish and the
other Catholic ethnic groups
and so on.
He, instead, put it
in terms of something
that every American had
to pay attention to.
About that same
time, other people
picked up reframing the
issues in a new way as well.
Betty Friedan, in "The
Feminine Mystique" in '62,
she didn't say women have got to
crash through the glass ceiling
just to make more money.
She said this is
about who women are.
And the majority
of the human race,
why aren't our
concerns, our language,
being paid attention to?
And at the same
time, Rachel Carson
said this is not just
about keeping pollution out
of your backyard.
In "The Silent
Spring," she said this
is about the death of nature.
If the birds, the bees, and all
the other animals and plants
die at the spring, humanity
will die shortly thereafter.
Now, those reframings
were really
deep and fundamental
because they
took a causal
explanation that was new
and a moral explanation
that was new
and added new moral categories.
So Americans who consider
themselves very moral today
are rather different
than Americans
who saw the world
as a moral stance,
say, in the '50s and '60s.
>> And I think, if
I may interject it,
it's not just about morals
in an intellectual sense.
We're talking about something
very emotional for people.
>> You bet.
You bet.
That's right.
Part of the issue
with psychedelics,
part of the issue with
holistic health instead
of standard medical care,
personal growth psychology
was dealing directly
with the issue
of what's personally authentic.
What's real for me
inwardly is a big deal
and has gotten redefined, just
as the large planetary concerns
or social justice concerns
have gotten redefined.
So we've literally added
15, 20 moral categories
that we didn't have, and we've
added a very "systemsy" view
of the world instead
of the fragmented
factoids of modernism.
In the modern world,
you're supposed
to focus your attention
down very tight,
nose to the grindstone--
>> Business as usual.
>> --business as usual.
Get out of my way.
I'm dressed for success.
I'm gonna focus very efficiently
on what needs to get done.
And the traditionals
are fending things off.
Well, the cultural creatives are
picking this fact and that one
and that one and putting
together a new world view,
and that's what makes
them so interesting to me.
>> Well, how effective can
50 million people be when
you've got another 50 million
pulling the other direction
in the traditional
camp and, I gather,
maybe 100 million people who
are sort of going along with
the tide of modernism?
>> Well, that's the right
question because the cultural
creatives haven't been
politically mobilized yet.
So the question is will they be?
And at this moment,
nobody knows.
It's impossible to predict.
>> And I'm not sure that
political mobilization is
the way to go, in any case.
>> Right, it's not.
We're talking about
people who've primarily
been changing the culture.
It's not like they've all been
in the political side of all
those different
social movements.
Each of the movements
had a cultural side,
was primarily trying
to change our minds,
change the way we saw the
world, change the way we lived.
And so they've been
pretty successful at that.
I think you have to say
something like this.
These are the people who are
providing most of the social
inventions of our time, a lot of
social inventions that are not
covered-- basically not news--
in the newspaper.
It's not the
technology inventions.
But you have to
say, over and over
again, they're coming
up with new things that
are quite interesting.
Those will have an effect.
They're making new
kinds of businesses.
There's a serious
brain drain out
of a lot of the corporations
of cultural creatives
who are saying this is a
terrible place to work.
I can't stand it anymore.
I'm going to make
my own business.
And so that's part of it too.
So you're seeing inventions
somewhere in the business
sector that's not the giant mega
corporations that are always
written about, but
rather a lot of smaller
to mid-sized businesses.
>> Entrepreneurial.
>> Entrepreneurial,
very change oriented,
very flat organizations
without so much hierarchy,
very collegial, worried about
nice places to work on the one
hand, worried about ecological
sustainability on the other
hand.
So you have a social invention
like the triple bottom line--
that is, it has to,
yes, make a profit,
but it also has to be
good for the environment,
and it has to be a good place
to be in terms of where you work
and how you treat your people.
>> Well, maybe I get
too caught up in this,
but I'm under the impression
that that's affecting
everybody.
Whether you're a modernist
or a traditionalist,
you want to have a
work environment that
satisfies your inner being.
>> And what you've got is a real
tendency of people to accept
the given world and not
be inventive socially,
and so there's a lot of
complaining in the rest
of the culture.
But the cultural creatives
are out there doing something.
Over and over again,
we found that these
are the people who volunteer
the most, who give the most
money to good
causes, who show up,
who want to walk their talk.
They may not walk their
talk all the time,
but they really feel bad
about it if they don't.
>> Well, how much interaction
is there amongst these main
cultural segments?
Are cultural creatives
moving into the other worlds
of the modernists and
the traditionalists?
>> Well, they're in the world
of the moderns all the time.
>> Yeah, hard to avoid.
>> Hard to avoid, and they're
not necessarily happy about it,
and the moderns may think
they're a little far out,
a little weird.
A lot of cultural
creatives feel they
have to sit on
themselves a lot at work,
not talk about their values--
or in public life,
for that matter.
The traditionals are the ones
who have really pulled loose
from modern society.
They're much less engaged,
much more willing to form
their own little enclaves.
The traditionals and the
moderns having the culture war
is one idea, but the cultural
creatives and the moderns
are having a learning process.
The moderns often
are good at imitating
what the cultural creatives
have come up with,
and that makes an interesting
process of cultural change.
>> Yeah.
Let me remind our
viewers that we're
talking about a
cultural subgroup,
the cultural creatives,
50 million people who
are committed to personal
growth, spiritual awareness,
a holistic view of things, and
an ecological sensitivity, if I
can summarize it in a nutshell.
As we're drawing toward the
close of our interview, Paul,
let me ask you, as a
student of this phenomenon,
how do you think the
cultural creatives can
move to become most effective?
>> Well, the main thing
is to gather together,
to have places to go,
to meet each other,
to sniff each other out and
decide if they like each other,
to have events that they go
to, occasions, coffee shops,
all that sort of thing.
It's simply a matter of meeting
and deciding what kind of world
they want to create together.
And so, to a large
extent, it's simply
getting into larger
and larger circles
and starting to create together.
The other part, of
course, is that they will
start mobilizing politically.
They will start becoming
more visible in the media.
Right now, even as we speak,
there's all sorts of media,
like yours, who want to
appeal to cultural creatives
and are talking about
that with each other.
And of course, you
could read the book.
[CHUCKLES]
>> "The Cultural
Creatives," naturally.
But what you're saying,
if I hear you right,
is that this movement
isn't stagnating.
It's growing.
>> Yes, it's growing, and
it's likely to accelerate.
While we're looking at a
time in the immediate future,
in the next five
to 10 years, when
it's likely to grow to maybe
half the population of the US,
in our studies, one
of the things we found
was there's an additional 20%
of Americans, another 40 million
people, who really buy most
of the cultural creative world
view, but they're very
concerned it wouldn't
be successful for them.
And it includes a lot of
Blacks, a lot of Hispanics,
a lot of ethnic
Catholics of one flavor
or another who see
this with longing,
and they want that
world, but they're not
quite ready to jump.
But they will get on that train
if they see it pulling out
of the station.
>> It's a hopeful sign.
Paul Ray, thank you so
much for being with me.
It's been enlightening
and inspiring.
>> Thank you, Jeffrey.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]